DOCS-8742-sockets-studio-kt (#1008)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: sockets/1.2/modules/ROOT/pages/editorial/sockets-connector-studio.adoc

= Use Studio to Configure Sockets Connector 1.2 - Mule 4

Anypoint Studio (Studio) editors help you design and update your Mule applications, properties, and configuration files.

To add and configure a connector in Studio:

. <<create-mule-project,Create a Mule project>>.
. <<add-connector-to-project,Add the connector to your Mule project>>.

> . <<configure-input-source,Configure the Sockets Listener source for the connector's flow>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<configure-input-source,Configure the sockets listener source for the connector's flow>>.
```

> . <<add-connector-operation, Configure the Send and Receive Operations in the flow>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<add-connector-operation, Configure the send and receive operations in the flow>>.
```
Send and Receive could be init capped if you consider these names rather than types....

> . <<configure-other-fields,Configure the Supported TCP Protocols>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<configure-other-fields,Configure supported TCP protocols>>.
```

[[create-mule-project]]
== Create a Mule Project

In Studio, create a new Mule project in which to add and configure the connector:

. In Studio, select *File > New > Mule Project*.
. Enter a name for your Mule project and click *Finish*.

[[add-connector-to-project]]
== Add the Connector to Your Mule Project

Add Anypoint Connector for Sockets (Sockets Connector) to your Mule project to automatically populate the XML code with the connector's namespace and schema location and add the required dependencies to the project's `pom.xml` file:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, click *(X) Search in Exchange*.
. In the *Add Dependencies to Project* view, type `sockets` in the search field.
. Click *Sockets* in *Available modules*.
. Click *Add*.
. Click *Finish*.

Adding a connector to a Mule project in Studio does not make that connector available to other projects in your Studio workspace.

[[configure-input-source]]
== Configure the Sockets Listener Source

> A source initiates a flow when a specified condition is met. The Sockets Listener source represents a socket endpoint to which clients can connect. By browsing to this endpoint, external clients establish a TCP or UDP Socket connection and trigger the flow each time they send a message:

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether we should init. cap. "sockets listener" source or not....

https://www.google.com/search?q=what+is+a+sockets+listener+source&oq=what+is+a+sockets+listener+source&aqs=chrome..69i57j69i64l3.7138j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8

What does the team say?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A source initiates a flow when a specified condition is met. The sockets listener source represents a socket endpoint to which clients can connect. By browsing to this endpoint, external clients establish a TCP or UDP socket connection and trigger the flow each time they send a message:
```

Reviewer: If these terms are init. capped because they are presented so in the UI, then they should also be formatted as UI labels, in bold (* *).

. In the *Mule Palette* view, select *Sockets* > *Listener*.
. Drag *Listener* to the Studio canvas.
. On the *Listener* configuration screen, optionally change the value of the *Display Name* field.
. Click the plus sign (+) next to the *Connector configuration* field to configure a global element that can be used by all instances of `sockets listener` in the app.
. On the *General* tab, for *Connection* select the `Tcp listener` or the `Udp listener` connections.
. Configure the specific tabs for the selected connection:
+
[%header,cols=2]
|===
| Tab Name | Description

> | *General* | Set the *Host* and the *Port* required attributes, and configure any other optional fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *General* | Set the required *Host* and *Port* attributes and configure optional fields as desired.
```

| *Buffer Configuration* | Optionally specify send and receive buffer size information.
| *TLS* | Optionally specify the TLS information.
| *Timeout Configuration* | Optionally specify the client and server timeout information.
| *Advanced* | Optionally specify the reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
|===

[start=7]
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect with the specific server.
. Click *OK*.

> In Studio, the Sockets Listener source in the flow looks like this:

Reviewer: ditto re. caps

.Sockets Listener Source
image::socket-listener-source.png[Sockets Listener Source]

> In Studio, configuring the Sockets Listener source with a TCP connection to accept local incoming connections on port `8082` looks like this:

Reviewer: ditto

.Sockets Listener Source Configuration
image::socket-listener-configuration.png[Sockets Listener Source Configuration]

In the *Configuration XML* tab, the XML looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
	<sockets:listener-config name="Sockets_Listener_config">
		<sockets:tcp-listener-connection host="localhost" port="8082" />
	</sockets:listener-config>

	<flow name="SocketsFlow" >
		<sockets:listene config-ref="Sockets_Listener_config"/>
	</flow>
----

> == Configure the Send, and Send and Receive Operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure the Send Operation and the Send and Receive Operation
```

When you add a connector operation to your flow, you immediately define a specific operation for that connector to perform. Sockets Connector provides two basic operations:

 * Send +

>  Sends the data using the client associated to the RequesterConnection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Sends the data using the client associated to the RequesterConnection
```

 * Send and receive +

>  Sends the data using the associated client and then blocks until a response is received or the timeout is met, in which case the operation returns a null payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Sends the data using the associated client and then blocks until a response is received or the timeout is met, in which case the operation returns a null payload
```

> To configure the Send, or Send and receive operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the send operation or the send and receive operation:
```

> . In the *Mule Palette* view, select *Sockets* > *Send*, or *Send and receive*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Mule Palette* view, select either: +
*  *Sockets* > *Send* 
*  *Sockets* > *Send and receive*
```

. Drag the *Send* or the *Send and receive* operation to the Studio canvas.
. On the operation configuration screen, optionally change the value of the *Display Name* field.
. Click the plus sign (+) next to the *Connector configuration* field to configure a global element that can be used by all instances of `Sockets Send` or `Sockets Send and receive` in the app.
. On the *General* tab, for *Connection* select the `Tcp requester` or the `Udp requester` connections.
. Configure the specific tabs for the selected connection:
+
[%header,cols=2]
|===
| Tab Name | Description

> | *General* | Set the *Host* and the *Port* required attributes, and configure any other optional fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *General* | Set the required *Host* and *Port* attributes and configure optional fields as desired.
```

| *Buffer Configuration* | Optionally specify send and receive buffer size information.
| *Connection* | Optionally select and configure one of the supported TCP protocols.
| *Local Address Settings* | Optionally specify the local address.
| *TLS* | Optionally specify the TLS information.
| *Timeout Configuration* | Optionally specify the client and server timeout information.
| *Advanced* | Optionally specify the reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
|===

[start=7]
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect with the specific server.
. Click *OK*.

> Additionally, for the *Send and receive* operation, configure the MIME Type as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, for the *Send and receive* operation, configure the MIME type as follows:
```

. Click the *Send and receive* operation from your flow.

> . On the *MIME Type* tab, select a MIME type from the drop-down menu field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *MIME Type* tab, select a MIME type from field menu.
```

> In Studio, the Sockets Send operation and Send and receive operation in the flow look like this:

Reviewer: ditto re. caps

.Sockets Send and Receive Operation
image::socket-send-operation.png[Sockets Send and Receive operation]

> In Studio, configuring either the Send operation or the Send and receive operation, with a TCP connection to accept local incoming connections on port `8082` looks like this:

Reviewer: ditto re. caps, and no comma:
```suggestion
In Studio, configuring either the Send operation or the Send and receive operation with a TCP connection to accept local incoming connections on port `8082` looks like this:
```

.Sockets Send or Send and Receive Operation Configuration
image::socket-sendreceive-configuration.png[Sockets Send or Send and Receive operation Configuration]

> In the *Configuration XML* tab, the Send operation configuration XML looks like this:

Reviewer: ditto

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<sockets:request-config name="Sockets_Send_config">
		<sockets:tcp-requester-connection host="localhost" port="8082" />
	</sockets:request-config>

	<flow name="SocketsFlow" >
		<sockets:send config-ref="Sockets_Send_config"/>
	</flow>
----

> In Studio, configuring the MIME Type as `application/json` for the Send and receive operation looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Studio, configuring the MIME type as `application/json` for the Send and receive operation looks like this:
```
...and ditto caps

.Sockets MIME Type Configuration
image::socket-mimetype-configuration.png[Sockets MIME type Configuration]

> In the *Configuration XML* tab, the Send and receive operation configuration XML looks like this:

Reviewer: ditto

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<sockets:request-config name="Sockets_Send_config">
	<sockets:tcp-requester-connection host="localhost" port="8082" />
</sockets:request-config>

<flow name="SocketsFlow" >
	<sockets:send-and-receive config-ref="Sockets_Send_Receive_config" outputMimeType="application/json"/>
</flow>
----

== Configure the Supported TCP Protocols

> Sockets Connector supports application-level protocols implemented on top of TCP. You must implement these protocols in both client and server ends so they can work properly. +

Reviewer: "...in both client and server ends so they can work properly."

In both the client and server?
In both the client and server ends of the communication flow?

And what does "so they can work properly" mean?
If you don't implement these protocols, what happens? 
In what way do the "ends" work properly or not?

> By default, the Sockets Connector implements the Safe Protocol; however, you can configure a different protocol for the connector operations both in Anypoint Studio and XML.

Reviewer: I looked up Safe Protocol to see if it is really a proper noun:

https://www.google.com/search?ei=22lOX9DxFpC60PEP3qWZ8Ak&q=what+is+the+safe+protocol+in+mulesoft&oq=what+is+the+safe+protocol+in+mulesoft&gs_lcp=CgZwc3ktYWIQAzoGCAAQFhAeOggIIRAWEB0QHjoFCCEQoAE6BwghEAoQoAFQ3itY2EBgvEJoAHAAeACAAXqIAdoLkgEDNS45mAEAoAEBqgEHZ3dzLXdpesABAQ&sclient=psy-ab&ved=0ahUKEwiQy_71o8jrAhUQHTQIHd5SBp4Q4dUDCA0&uact=5

It looks like there is ...

- element <safe-protocol>
- safe-protocol 
- Safe Protocol

Let me know? I'll stop marking it as a question from here to the end, so I don't "ditto" you to death!  ;-)

> Supported TCP protocols:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported TCP protocols include the following:
```

* Direct Protocol +
  The socket reads until no more bytes are immediately available. On slow networks, `EOFProtocol` and `LengthProtocol` might be more reliable.
* EOF Protocol +
  Reading is terminated by the stream being closed by the client.
* Length Protocol +
  This protocol is defined by sending or reading an integer (the packet length) and then the data to transfer.
* Custom Class Loading Length Protocol +

>   A length protocol that uses a specific class loader to load objects from streams.

Reviewer: Note that at this point, the definitions move from being complete sentences to sentence fragments.
In all writing, try to make list items parallel: all fragments or all sentences.

* Safe Protocol +

>   A test protocol that precedes every message with a cookie, and should not be used in production environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A test protocol that precedes every message with a cookie and which should not be used in production environments.
```

* Streaming Protocol +
  Allows the socket's Send operation to return a message with the original `InputStream` as payload.
* XML Message Protocol +
  Use this protocol to read streaming XML documents. The only requirement is that each document includes an XML declaration at the beginning of the document in the form  of `<?xml....`. +
  Data is read until a new document is found or until there is no more currently available data. For slower networks, `XmlMessageEofProtocol` might be more reliable. +

>   Also, because the default character encoding for the platform is used to decode the message bytes when looking for the XML declaration, some caution with message character encodings is warranted.

Reviewer: Does these three sentences really require three separate paragraphs?

* XML Message EOF Protocol +

>   Extends `XmlMessageProtocol` to continue reading until either a new message or EOF is found.

Reviewer: If "EOF" is a value, then `EOF` or `eof`?

* Custom Protocol +
  Define your own custom protocol by writing a class that extends `TcpProtocol`.

=== Configure TCP Protocols for the Sockets Listener

To configure supported TCP protocols for the Sockets Listener:

. Open the *Global Element Properties* configuration of the Sockets Listener.

> . On the *General* tab, for *Connection* select  the `Tcp listener`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *General* tab, for *Connection* select `Tcp listener`.
```

> . On the *General* section of the *General* tab, for *Protocol*, select one of the supported protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *General* section of the *General* tab, for *Protocol* select one of the supported protocols.
```

. Set the required fields for the connector.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect with the specific server.
. Click *OK*.

> In Studio, configuring the Sockets Listener to use Direct Protocol looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Studio, configuring the Sockets Listener to use Direct Protocol looks like this:
```

.Sockets Direct Protocol Configuration
image::socket-tcp1-configuration.png[Sockets Direct Protocol Configuration]

> In the *Configuration XML* tab, the XML looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *Configuration XML* tab, the XML looks like this:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
	<sockets:listener-config name="Sockets_Listener_config" >
		<sockets:tcp-listener-connection host="localhost" port="8082" >
			<sockets:protocol>
				<sockets:direct-protocol />
			</sockets:protocol>
		</sockets:tcp-listener-connection>
	</sockets:listener-config>
----

=== Configure TCP Protocols for Send and Receive Operations

To configure supported TCP protocols for either the Send operation or the Send and receive operation:

. Open the *Global Element Properties* configuration of your Sockets operation.
. On the *General* tab, for *Connection* select `Tcp requester`.
. On the *Connection* tab, for *Protocol* select one of the supported protocols.
. Set the required fields for the connector.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect with the specific server.
. Click *OK*.

> In Studio, configuring the Send operation to use Direct Protocol, looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Studio, configuring the Send operation to use Direct Protocol looks like this:
```

.Sockets Direct Protocol Configuration
image::socket-tcp2-configuration.png[Sockets Direct Protocol Configuration]

> In the *Configuration XML* tab, the XML looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the *Configuration XML* tab, the XML looks like this:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<sockets:request-config name="Sockets_Send_config" >
	<sockets:tcp-requester-connection >
		<sockets:protocol >
			<sockets:direct-protocol />
		</sockets:protocol>
	</sockets:tcp-requester-connection>
</sockets:request-config>
----

[[view-app-log]]

== View the App Log

> To check for problems, you can view the app log as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check for problems, you can view the app log:
```

* If you’re running the app from Anypoint Platform, the output is visible in the Anypoint Studio console window.
* If you’re running the app using Mule from the command line, the app log is visible in your OS console.

Unless the log file path is customized in the app’s log file (`log4j2.xml`), you can also view the app log in the default location `MULE_HOME/logs/<app-name>.log`.

== See Also

* xref:connectors::introduction/introduction-to-anypoint-connectors.adoc[Introduction to Anypoint Connectors]
* xref:connectors::introduction/intro-config-use-studio.adoc[Use Studio to Configure a Connector]

> * xref:sockets-documentation.adoc[Sockets Connector Reference].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:sockets-documentation.adoc[Sockets Connector Reference]
```
